A compound type is a type that is defined in terms of another type. Pointers and References are famous compound types.

<br/>

## 2.3.1 References

A reference defines an alternative name for an object. A reference type “refers to” another type.

```cpp
int ival = 1024; 
int &refVal = ival; // refValrefers to (is another name for) ival int &refVal2;
int &refVal2;       // error: a reference must be initialized
```

- Ordinarily, when we initialize a variable, the value of the initializer is copied into the object we are creating. When we define a reference, instead of copying the initializer’s value, ___we bind the reference to its initializer.___
- Once initialized, a reference remains bound to its initial object. There is no way to rebind a reference to refer to a different object. Because there is no way to rebind a reference, references must be initialized.

> A reference is not an object. Instead, a reference is just another name for an already existing object. (Reference is an Alias)


- After a reference has been defined, all operations on that reference are actually operations on the object to which the reference is bound:
	- When we assign to a reference, we are assigning to the object to which the reference is bound. 
	- When we fetch the value of a reference, we are really fetching the value of the object to which the reference is bound. 
	- Similarly, when we use a reference as an initializer, we are really using the object to which the reference is bound.
- Because references are not objects, we may not define a reference to a reference.

Each identifier that is a reference must be preceded by the & symbol:

```cpp
int i = 1024, i2 = 2048; // iand i2are both ints 
int &r = i, r2 = i2;     // r is a reference bound to i; r2 is an int
int i3 = 1024, &ri = i3; // i3is an int; riis a reference bound to i3 
int &r3 = i3, &r4 = i2;  // both r3and r4are references
```

- With two exceptions that we’ll cover in § 2.4.1 (p. 61) and § 15.2.3 (p. 601), ___the type of a reference and the object to which the reference refers must match exactly.___

- Moreover, for reasons we’ll explore in § 2.4.1, a reference may be bound only to an object, not to a literal or to the result of a more general expression:
```cpp
double pi = 3.14;
int &math_pi = pi;  //Error a reference of type "int &" (not const-qualified) cannot be initialized with a value of type "double"
int &discount = 10; // initial value of reference to non-const must be an lvalue
```

<br/>
<br/>

## 2.3.2 Pointers

A pointer is a compound type that “points to” another type by holding the address of that object.
- Like references, pointers are used for indirect access to other objects. 
- Unlike a reference, a pointer is an object in its own right. 
- Pointers can be assigned and copied; a single pointer can point to several different objects over its lifetime. 
- Unlike a reference, a pointer need not be initialized at the time it is defined. 
- Like other built-in types, pointers defined at block scope have undefined value if they are not initialized.

<br/>

- We define a pointer type by writing a declarator of the form \*d,where d is the name being defined. 

	```cpp
	int ival = 42; 
	int *p = &ival; // pholds the address ofival; p is a pointer to ival
	```

- Because references are not objects, they don’t have addresses. Hence, we may not define a pointer to a reference.



- We can define multiple pointers in a single line but the \* must be repeated for each pointer variable:

	```cpp
	int *ip1, *ip2;  // both ip1and ip2are pointers to int 
	double dp, *dp2; // dp2is a pointer to double; dp is a double
	```

- With two exceptions, which we cover in § 2.4.2 (p. 62) and § 15.2.3 (p. 601), the types of the pointer and the object to which it points must match:
	```cpp
	double dval; 
	double *pd = &dval; // ok: initializer is the address ofa double 
	double *pd2 = pd;   // ok: initializer is a pointer to double 
	int *pi = pd;       // error: types ofpiand pddiffer 
	pi = &dval;         // error: assigning the address ofa double toapointer to int
	```

<br/>

### Pointer Value 

The value (i.e., the address) stored in a pointer can be in one of four states: 
1. It can point to an object. 
2. It can point to the location just immediately past the end of an object. 
3. It can be a null pointer, indicating that it is not bound to any object. 
4. It can be invalid; values other than the preceding three are invalid.

- It is an error to copy or otherwise try to access the value of an invalid pointer. As when we use an uninitialized variable, this error is one that the compiler is unlikely to detect. The result of accessing an invalid pointer is undefined. Therefore, we must always know whether a given pointer is valid. 
- Although pointers in cases 2 and 3 are valid, there are limits on what we can do with such pointers. Because these pointers do not point to any object, we may not use them to access the (supposed) object to which the pointer points. If we do attempt to access an object through such pointers, the behavior is undefined.

### Using a Pointer to Access an Object

- When a pointer points to an object, we can use the __dereference operator__ (the * operator) to access that object:
	```cpp
	int ival = 42;
	int *p = &ival; // pholds the address ofival; p is a pointer to ival 
	cout << *p;     // *yields the object to which ppoints; prints 42
	```
- Dereferencing a pointer yields the object to which the pointer points. We can assign to that object by assigning to the result of the dereference: 
	```cpp
	*p = 0; // *yields the object; we assign a new value to ivalthrough p 
	cout << *p; // prints 0
	```

- We may dereference only a valid pointer that points to an object.


<br/>
<br/>

### Null Pointers

- A null pointer does not point to any object.

- There are several ways to obtain a null pointer:
	```cpp
	int *p1 = nullptr; // equivalent to int*p1=0; 
	int *p2 = 0;// directly initializes p2from the literal constant 0
	int *p3 = NULL; // equivalent to int*p3=0; must #includecstdlib 
	```

- It is illegal to assign an int variable to a pointer, even if the variable’s value happens to be 0.
	```cpp
	int zero = 0; 
	pi = zero; // error: cannot assign an inttoapointer
	```

<br/>

### Assignment and Pointers

Unlike references which cannot be reassigned (as they are not objects), We can re-assign pointers to point to new objects. Assignment makes the pointer point to a different object :
```cpp
int i = 42;
int *ip = 0; //ip is a nullptr
ip = &i; //ip is now an int pointer pointing i
```

It can be hard to keep straight whether an assignment changes the pointer or the object to which the pointer points. The important thing to keep in mind is that ___assignment changes its left-hand operand.___

<br/>

### void* Pointers

The type void* is a special pointer type that can hold the address of any object.

There are only a limited number of things we can do with a void* pointer: We can compare it to another pointer, we can pass it to or return it from a function, and we can assign it to another void* pointer. We cannot use a void* to operate on the object it addresses—we don’t know that object’s type, and the type determines what operations we can perform on the object.

<br/>
<br/>

## 2.3.3 Understanding Compound Type Declarations

- As we’ve seen, a variable definition consists of a base type and a list of declarators. Each declarator can relate its variable to the base type differently from the other declarators in the same definition. 
- Thus, a single definition might define variables of different types:
	```cpp
	int i = 1024, *p = &i, &r = i; // iis an int; pis a pointer to int; r is a reference to int
	```

<br/>

### Defining Multiple Variables

It is a common misconception to think that the type modifier (* or &) applies to all the variables defined in a single statement.
```cpp
int* p1, p2; // p1 is a pointer to int; p2 is an int
```

<br/>

### Pointers to Pointers

We indicate each pointer level by its own *. That is, we write \** for a pointer to a pointer, \*** for a pointer to a pointer to a pointer, and so on:
```cpp
int my_variable = 100;
int *my_pointer = &my_variable;
int **my_pointer_to_pointer = &my_pointer;
*my_pointer_to_pointer = 1;  //An error,as it refers to my_pointer and we can't assign an int to a pointer.
**my_pointer_to_pointer =1; //legal as it refers to my_variable
```

<br/>

### References to Pointers

- A reference is not an object. Hence, we may not have a pointer to a reference. 
- However, because a pointer is an object, we can define a reference to a pointer:
```cpp
int my_variable = 100;
int *my_pointer = &my_variable;
int *&yo_pointer = my_pointer;  //yo_pointer is a reference to a pointer.
*yo_pointer = 200;  //We are actually dereferencing my_pointer,my_variable is now 200
```


<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
