An array is similar to a vector but offers more performance at the cost of flexibility.

- Like a vector, an array is a container of unnamed objects of a single type that we access by position. 
- Unlike a vector, arrays have fixed size; we cannot add elements to an array.

<br/>

# 3.5.1 Defining and Initialising built-in arrays

- Array is a compound type.
- An array declarator has the form `a[d]`, where a is the name being defined and d is the dimension of the array.
- As dimension is a part of array's type, it must be known at compile time, which means that the dimension must be a constant expression.

    ```cpp
    unsigned cnt = 42;          // not a constant expression
    constexpr unsigned sz = 42; // constant expression
    int arr[10];                // array of ten ints
    int *parr[sz];              // array of 42 pointers to int
    string bad[cnt];            // error: cnt is not a constant expression
    string strs[get_size()];    // ok if get_size is constexpr, error otherwise
    ```

- By default, the elements in an array are default initialized
- As with variables of built-in type, a default-initialized array of built-in type that is defined inside a function will have undefined values.
- When we define an array, we must specify a type for the array. We cannot use `auto` to deduce the type from a list of initializers. 
- As with vector, arrays hold objects. Thus, there are no arrays of references.

<br/>


### Explicitly Initializing Array Elements

- When we do so, we can omit the dimension. If we omit the dimension, the compiler infers it from the number of initializers. 
- If we specify a dimension, the number of initializers must not exceed the specified size. 
- If the dimension is greater than the number of initializers, the initializers are used for the first elements and any remaining elements are value initialized.

    ```cpp
    int a2[] = {0, 1, 2}; // an array of dimension 3
    int a3[5] = {0, 1, 2}; // equivalent to a3[] = {0, 1, 2, 0, 0}
    string a4[3] = {"hi", "bye"}; // same as a4[] = {"hi", "bye", ""}
    int a5[2] = {0,1,2}; // error: too many initializers
    ```

<br/>

### Character Arrays Are Special

- We can initialize arrays from a string literal. 
- When we use this form of initialization, it is important to remember that string literals end with a null character. That null character is copied into the array along with the characters in the literal:

    ```cpp
    char a1[] = {’C’, ’+’, ’+’};        // list initialization, no null
    char a2[] = {’C’, ’+’, ’+’, ’\0’};  // list initialization, explicit null
    char a3[] = "C++";                  // null terminator added automatically
    const char a4[6] = "Daniel";        // error: no space for the null!
    ```

<br/>

### No Copy or Assignment

We cannot initialize an array as a copy of another array, nor is it legal to assign one
array to another:

```cpp
int a[] = {0, 1, 2};    // array of three ints
int a2[] = a;           // error: cannot initialize one array with another
a2 = a;                 // error: cannot assign one array to another
```

<br/>

### Understanding Complicated Array Declarations

Defining arrays that hold pointers is fairly straightforward, defining a pointer or reference to an array is a bit more complicated:

```cpp
int *ptrs[10];              // ptrs is an array of ten pointers to int
int &refs[10] = {1,2,3};    // error: no arrays of references (array of reference is not allowed)
int (*Parray)[10] = &arr;   // Parray points to an array of ten ints, Here it is mandatory to mention the size of the array(arr) that the pointer(Parray) is pointing to
int (&arrRef)[10] = arr;    // arrRef refers to an array of ten ints, Mandatory to mention the size aswell.
```

- By default, type modifiers bind right to left. Reading the definition of `ptrs` from right to left is easy: We see that we’re defining an array of size 10, named `ptrs`, that holds pointers to int.

- For complex definitions, It can be easier to understand array declarations by starting with the
array’s name and reading them from the inside out.

    - We start by observing that the parentheses around `*Parray` mean that `Parray` is a pointer.Looking right, we see that `Parray` points to an array of size 10. Looking left, we see that the elements in that array are ints. Thus, `Parray` is a pointer to an arrayof ten ints.

    - For the below code, Reading this declaration from the inside out, we see that `arry` is a reference. Looking right, we see that the object to which `arry` refers is an array of size 10. Looking left, we see that the element type is pointer to int. Thus, `arry` is a reference to an array of ten pointers.

        ```cpp
        int *(&arry)[10] = ptrs; // arry is a reference to an array of ten pointers
        ```


<br/>
<br/>

# 3.5.2 Accessing the Elements of an Array

- As usual, the indices start at 0. For an array of ten elements, the indices are 0 through 9, not 1 through 10.

    ```cpp
    int arr[3] = {1,2,3};
    std::cout << arr[0] << std::end;  //prints out : 1
    ```


- As with the library vector and string types, we can use a range for or the subscript operator to access elements of an array. Because the dimension is part of each array type, the system knows how many
elements are in the array, _range for_ manages the array traversals easily.

    ```cpp
    // code to traverse an array
    for (auto i : arr1) {
            std::cout << i << endl;
        }
    ```

- When we use a variable to subscript an array, we normally should define that
variable to have type `size_t`. `size_t` is a machine-specific unsigned type that
is guaranteed to be large enough to hold the size of any object in memory. The
`size_t` type is defined in the _cstddef header_, which is the C++ version of the
`stddef.h` header from the C library.


<br/>

### Checking Subscript Values

- As with string and vector, it is up to the programmer to ensure that the subscript value is in range—that is, that the index value is equal to or greater than zero
and less than the size of the array. 
- Nothing stops a program from stepping across
an array boundary except careful attention to detail and thorough testing of the
code. It is possible for programs to compile and execute yet still be fatally wrong.


<br/>
<br/>


# 3.5.3 Pointers and Arrays

- In C++ pointers and arrays are closely intertwined. In particular, as we’ll see, when
we use an array, the compiler ordinarily converts the array to a pointer.

- When we subscript an array, the result
is the object at that location in the array. As with any other object, we can obtain a
pointer to an array element by taking the address of that element:

    ```cpp
    string nums[] = {"one", "two", "three"}; // array of strings
    string *p = &nums[0]; // p points to the first element in nums
    ```
- However, arrays have a special property—in most places when we use an array,
the compiler automatically substitutes a pointer to the first element:

    ```cpp
    string *p2 = nums; // equivalent to p2 = &nums[0]
    ```

- There are various implications of the fact that operations on arrays are often
really operations on pointers. One such implication is that when we use an array
as an initializer for a variable defined using `auto` (§ 2.5.2, p. 68), the deduced type
is a pointer, not an array:

    ```cpp
    int ia[] = {0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9}; // ia is an array of ten ints
    auto ia2(ia); // ia2 is an int* that points to the first element in ia
    ia2 = 42; // error: ia2 is a pointer, and we can’t assign an int to a pointer
    ```