
> Qualifiers give some property to the identifier, IT IS NOT A TYPE. 

We can make a variable unchangeable by defining the variable’s type as `const`.
Because we can’t change the value of a const object after we create it, ___it must be initialized.___

~~~c
const int bufSize = 512;

bufSize = 480; // error: attempt to write to const object
~~~

<br/>

### Initialization and const
---

~~~c
int num = 42;
const int constNum = num;
int num = constNum;
~~~

- The const(ness) of `constNum` matters only for operation that might change `constNum`. Hence a non-const variable can be copied to a const one.
- Similarly a const variable can be copied to a non-const variable.

<br/>

### By Default, const Objects Are Local to a File

Reason: 

	- compiler will usually replace uses of the variable with its corresponding value during compilation. 
	- To substitute the value for the variable, the compiler has to see the variable’s initializer.
	- When we split a program into multiple files, every file that uses the const must have access to its initializer.
	- In order to see the initializer, the variable must be defined in every file that wants to use the variable’s value.
	- To support this usage, yet avoid multiple definitions of the same variable, const variables are defined as local to the file.

>Therefore, When we define a const with the same name in multiple files, it is as if we had written definitions for separate variables in each file.

* Sometimes we have a const variable that we want to share across multiple files but whose initializer is not a constant expression, In such case, we don’t want
the compiler to generate a separate variable in each file but We want to define the const in one file, and declare it in the other files that use that object.

- ___To share a const object among multiple files, you must define the variable as `extern`.___

~~~c
// file_1.cc defines and initializes a const that is accessible to other files
extern const int bufSize = fcn();

// file_1.h
extern const int bufSize; // same bufSize as defined in file_1.cc

~~~

 #### Concept Clarity

~~~cpp
const int buf; //error : const must be initialised.
int cnt = 0; //legal
const int sz = cnt; //legal
++cnt; //legal
++sz; // error : const canot be modified
~~~

<br/>

### References to const

We can create a reference to const variable but that reference can't modify the const variable. 
~~~c
const int constNum = 10;
const int &constRef = constNum; //the reference must be of const int type.

constRef = 1; //error
~~~

<br/>

### Initialization and References to const

~~~c
double dval = 3.14;
int &ri = dval; //Illegal as dval is of double type
~~~

The first exception for "the type of reference should match the type of the object that is being bound is" :
~~~c
double dval = 3.14;
const int &ri = dval; //legal

/*
compiler transforms the code to something like:

const int temp = deval;
const int &ri = temp;

*/
~~~

<br/>

### A Reference to const May Refer to an Object That Is Not const

- Binding a reference to const to an object says nothing about whether the underlying object itself is const. 
- Because the underlying object might be non const, it might be changed by other means:

~~~c
int num = 10;
int &numRef1 = num;
const int &numRef2 = num;

std::cout << numRef2; //yields 10

numRef1 = 0;

std::cout << numRef2; //yields 0
~~~

>Binding numRef2 to the (nonconst) int num is legal. However, we cannot use numRef2 to changenum. Even so, the value in num still might change. We can change num by assigning to it directly, or by assigning to another reference bound to num, such as numRef1.

<br/>

### Pointers and const

- Like a ___reference to const___, a ___pointer to const___ may not be used to change the object to which the pointer points. 
- We may store the address of a const object only in a pointer to const

~~~c
const int num2 = 20;
int *num2Pointer = &num2; //Ilegal as num2 is a const qualifier.

const int num3 = 30;
const int *num3Pointer = &num3;
*num3Pointer =40; //Ileagal, const can not be modified. 
~~~

we noted that there are two exceptions to the rule that the types of a pointer and the object to which it points must match. 

The first exception is that we can use a pointer to const to point to a nonconst object

~~~c
int num1 = 10;
const int *num1Pointer = &num1;
~~~

>Like a reference to const, a pointer to const says nothing about whether the object to which the pointer points is const. Defining a pointer as a pointer to
const affects only what we can do with the pointer. It is important to remember that there is no guarantee that an object pointed to by a pointer to const won’t change.


>It may be helpful to think of pointers and references to const as pointers or references ”that think they point or refer to const.”

<br/>

### const Pointers

- Unlike references, pointers are objects. Hence, as with any other object type, we can have a pointer that is itself const.
- Like any other const object, a const pointer must be initialized, and once initialized, its value (i.e., the address that it holds) may not be changed.
- We indicate that the pointer is const by putting the const after the *. This placement indicates that it is the pointer, not the pointed-to type, that is const

~~~cpp
int num = 10;
int *const numPointer = &num ; //numPointer will always point to num

const double pi = 3.14159;
const double *const pip = &pi; // pip is a const pointer to a const object. see explanation below

/*
since pi is a const double we have to make pip(const pointer) as a const double too!
*/
~~~

<br/>

### Top-Level const

As pointers are objects, we can talk independently about whether a pointer is const and whether the objects to which it can point are const. 

- We use the term ___top-level___ const to indicate that the pointer itself is a const. 
- When a pointer can point to a const object, we refer to that const as a ___low-level const___.

~~~c++
int num1 = 10;
int *const numPointer1 = &num1; //can't change the value of numPointer1, hence const is top level.

const int num2 = 10; //can't change num, hence const is top level. 
const int *numPointer2 = &num2; //can change numPointer2, hence const is low level.

const int *const numPointer3 = numPointer2; //Left most const is low level, right most is not.

const int &num2Ref =num2; //const in reference is always low level!
~~~

> Top level and low level matter's when copying objects. 
> 1. top level const are ignored, an object can be copied from or copied into a const. 
> 2. low level const's are never ignored. When we copy an object,
both objects must have the same low-level const qualification or there must be a conversion between the types of the two objects. In general, we can convert a nonconst to const but not the other way round.


~~~cpp
int num1 = 10;
int *const num1Pointer = &num1; //top level const pointer.
int *randomPointer = num1Pointer; //top level const can be copied.

const int num2 = 10;
const int *num2Pointer = &num2;
int *anotherRandomPointer = num2Pointer; //ERROR: can't ignore low level const.

//since the object being copied is const qualified type, the type of identifier (anotherRandomPointer) also must be const qualified. 
~~~

<br/>

### `constexpr` and Constant Expressions

- A constant expression is an expression whose value cannot change and that can be evaluated at compile time.
	- A literal is a constant expression. 
	- A const object that is initialized from a co`nstant expression is also a constant expression.

- Whether a given object (or expression) is a constant expression depends on the types and the initializers.

~~~c
int staff_size = 27; //Not a const expr, even though it is initialised from a literal, the type is not const qualified.

const int max_files = 20; //Const expr

const int workload = get_work_load(); //Not a Const expr as the value of initialiser is not known at compile time.

const int additional_files = max_files +1; //const expr
~~~

> Under the new standard C++11, we can ask the compiler to verify that a variable is a constant expression by declaring the variable in a constexpr declaration. 

Variables declared as `constexpr` are implicitly const and must be initialized by constant expressions:

~~~c
constexpr int mf = 20; // 20 is a constant expression
constexpr int limit = mf + 1; // mf + 1 is a constant expression
constexpr int sz = size(); // ok only if size is a constexpr function
~~~

Although we cannot use an ordinary function as an initializer for a `constexpr` variable, The new standard lets us define certain functions as `constexpr`. Such functions must be simple enough that the compiler can evaluate them at compile time. We can use `constexpr` functions in the initializer of a `constexpr` variable.

<br/>

### Literal Types

The types we can use in a `constexpr` are known as “literal types” because they are simple enough to have literal values.

- Of the types we have used so far, the arithmetic, reference, and pointer types are literal types. 
- Our Sales_item class and the library IO and string types are not literal types. Hence, we cannot define variables of these types as `constexprs`.



<br/>
<br/>
<br/>
